in this video I'm going to walk you
through my process of writing clean code
as a senior react developer this process
has basically been built over 8 years of
experient and hopefully it can help you
write better code and also if you want
to learn how to build a big and complex
application with react as a total
beginner check out project react in the
description so over here we have a
simple react application with a simple
component and we have your profile IDs
which is a static array of numbers we
have one all the way through five and
then taking those IDs we're mapping over
each one of them and then for every
single one we're rendering a simple
anchor tag and we're redirecting to SL
profile SL ID now our task is to
actually build out the profile page that
this link is going to send to and
through that I'm going to show you my
process of approaching this and how I
Write Clean code and we're going to do
it in very few lines of code so the
first thing that we're going to want to
do is come here to our sidebar and
create a new folder because this is an
empty project we currently don't have a
folder for all of our page components so
we're going to come here make a new
folder we're going to call this one
pages and inside of it we're going to
make a new file and we're going to do
profile page. TSX like so create it and
then open it in here we're going to do R
jsfc for a shortcut we're going to do
profile page and then we're just going
to put a div over here and now we're
going to close this what happened there
we go why is this always so much more
difficult than I want it to be and in
here we're going to put the content for
our actual page now I'm keeping things
simple for the video we don't actually
have any routing solution set up to
actually render this page on SLB
profiles but you can use your
imagination that's not the point of this
video the point of this video is to
teach you how to build this component
and the other components and more
importantly how to approach building
them so the first thing that we're going
to need in this component is probably
some Styles right for the general page
so we're going to come here and do class
name and we're going to do container and
then MX Auto what this is going to do is
this container class here is going to
set a Max width for this entire div and
the MX Auto is going to make sure that
this is centered now the thing about
these Styles over here is I wouldn't put
them directly inside of this profile
page component because the truth is in
reality in a real project you're most
likely going to have other pages in your
application and they're most probably
going to want to also have the same
Styles over here these are more
technically called layout Styles than
specific Styles related only to the
profile page so instead of doing this
what I would actually do instead is I
would come here to my sidebar and I'll
do a new folder here because again we
don't have a folder for components we're
going to do components and in here I'm
actually going to do a component and
we're going to I'm actually going to do
a component we're going to call this one
page layout
TSX like so and in this component we're
going to put these exact Styles so let's
close the sidebar let's come over here
and let's take actually all of this CU
this is going to be pretty much the same
let's go back here to page layout rename
this to page layout so page layout and
then we're going to have this component
taken children as props we're going to
put these Styles over here and then wrap
the children with this div that way we
can use this for any page in our
application and always get the same
Styles applied so we're going to come
here and we're going to do type page
layout props and that is going to be
props with children and we're going to
import this directly from react let's
keep things simple we're not going to
have any other props over here and then
we're going to do here children children
in and then page layout props like so
and then we're going to pass these
children directly inside of the div
children like so now we have the page
layout component we can come back here
to the actual page remove these STS
because we're not going to need them and
then instead of of this div we can
directly do page layout import this from
component page layout and then put our
content over here for example we're
going to put H1 profile page like so and
remove the space now we did the same
exact thing as we had it before but
we've extracted all of the layout Styles
inside of a separate component and we
can actually use that component in here
in the profile page and any other page
that we have in our application this is
also really useful in the case where you
might want to add different things to
this page layout for example in a lot of
cases you're to have a Navar component
over here and if we save we might also
have a footer over here as well right
these would go inside of the page layout
because you don't want to have to import
and put all of these components in every
single page even worse if you want to
change how these are displayed maybe
this gets a wrapper div or something
with some Styles you can put them once
inside of this component and then every
page that uses this component
automatically gets the same exact Styles
this makes it much more cleaner and it's
much more scalable to do it this way now
here's the thing what we're currently
doing right now inside of this video is
something called learning by doing right
I'm not just telling you and showing you
Theory and just borrowing you with that
I'm actually showing you how it's done
and more importantly I'm helping you
understand why we do it this way instead
of another way and that's great because
that is also what the sponsor of today's
video brilliant also does so brillant is
a place where you learn by doing with
thousands of interactive lessons in
various topics such as math data
analytics Ai and more importantly for us
programming brilliant has a learning
platform that is designed to be uniquely
effective each lesson on there has you
solve problems using a Hands-On approach
that lets you play and get a feel for
different concepts which actually has
been proven to be a method six times
more effective than just watching simple
lecture videos plus all of the content
on brillant is crafted by an
award-winning team of researchers and
professionals from places like MIT
Microsoft Google and more the great
thing about brilliant is that it really
helps you build critical thinking skills
through problem solving and not
memorizing so while you're building real
knowledge on specific topics you're also
learning how to be a better thinker and
it helps you do all of that in just a
couple minutes a day with really fun
lessons that you can do whenever you
have the time it's really the opposite
of mindless scrolling and it really
builds a great habit they actually have
some Great Courses such as thinking in
code which follows what we're doing in
this video and teaches you solid
foundations for computer science which
will help you actually become a better
react developer to try everything that
brilliant has to offer for free for a
full 30 days visit brilliant.org and
solutions or click the first link in the
description you're also going to get 20%
off an annual premium subscription thank
thank you once again to brilliant for
sponsoring this video and now let's
continue learning about clean react code
so now we have to profile page this
profile page is going to receive an ID
so we're going to come here we're going
to do type profile page props that is
going to be a simple object with profile
ID and that is going to be number let's
assume that this ID somehow gets passed
through our navigation solution which
again we don't have on setup user
imagination here we're going to do
profile ID and we're going to do profile
page props now we're going to want to
use this ID to fetch the data of that
profile because the ID obviously isn't
enough and then we're going to want to
display that data inside of this
component so to do that we might do
something like this const and then
profile data set profile data and then
use State we're going to Define this to
undefined for now and then depending on
how you do this you might use react
query you might use something else we're
just going to do it in a simple use
effect because it's efficient for this
video we're going to do use effect and
then we're going to call this a function
we're going to give this a depend
which is going to be profile ID and
inside of here we're just going to do
const fetch profile profile equals a
sync function and then here we're going
to do a wait and then fetch SL API
profiles and then we're going to pass
your profile ID like so and then we're
going to actually we're going to need
the response so cons response equals a
weit then cons data equals a weit and
then response on. Json and finally we're
going to do set profile data and we're
going to do profile actually data and
set the data inside of our state and
finally we're going to call fetch
profile and we're going to fetch profile
and we're going to call this function
directly inside of the use effect so now
again this is a very simple example but
essentially you have some code that is
going to fetch the data based on this ID
and then it's going to set it in some
State now this is all well and good and
this will work this is going to fetch
the data and then obious it's not
handling loading in error states which
again it's fine it's going to set the
data inside a profile data and then we
can use it directly in this component
but again I wouldn't do it this way this
is not clean Cod the thing is this code
shouldn't belong inside of a page
component a page component its only
responsibility is to take all the
different pieces of code and things that
are available across the application put
them together and actually build what it
is to actually be the profile page it's
not responsible for actually
implementing the details of those
specific things like this fetching for
example it should just pull something
that fetches the data instead of
implementing the data fetch itself if
you get what I mean so instead what I
would do is I would come here to my
sidebar and I would create a new folder
inside of SRC and we're going to call
this one hooks like so inside of here
we're going to create a new file we're
going to do use fetch profile. TS we're
going to close this open up use fetch
profile in here I'm going to export one
simple function export function use
fetch profile and this one is going to
take profile ID D which is going to be
of type number and in here we're going
to put the same exact code as we had
over here we're going to take all of
this code here and we're going to put it
directly inside of use fetch profile
which is a custom hook we're going to
come here import use State we're going
to come here and we're going to import
use effect and finally we're going to
return profile dat data like so the
benefit of doing it this way is that now
we've extracted all of the logic of
actually fetching a specific profile
based on the profile ID in a separate
component this makes it reusable it
makes any component that actually needs
to fetch the profile just have to import
this use fetch profile hook and it also
removes the responsibility of profile
page to actually implement the details
the actual implementation of fetching a
user's profile and then going back to
profile page the only thing that we have
to do is we just have to do const
profile data equals use fetch profile
import this from at hook profile and
then pass it profile ID like so and now
we have the same functionality we have
the same profile data but again we're
using this custom hook which makes our
code a lot cleaner right so whenever
you're thinking about adding some
functionality to a component always ask
yourself first does this component have
the responsibility of actually
implementing that functionality or does
it belong somewhere else and we just
have to import that component or that
custom hook instead right and then you
make your decision based off of that so
now we have profile data over here we're
actually going to want to do something
with profile data let's say we want to
actually use it here profile data and
profile data contains some things that
we want to put inside of this component
again I wouldn't do it this way because
once again it's not the responsibility
of profile page to actually have the
code that implements the UI of the
profile data instead what I would do
once again is I would come here inside
of components and I would create a new
file and I would call this one profile
data. TSX like so and put all of that
logic inside of a separate file inside
of a separate component so here we're
going to do our jsfc we're going to do
profile data and then we're going to
return for now empty you can just let's
see what happened you can just imagine
that that this will do something cool
with profile data right and then here
we're just going to have this type
profile data props and that is going to
be an object and it's going to return
data and we're just going to put any for
now because we actually don't have any
types it doesn't really matter we're
going to do here this and we're going to
put profile data profile data props like
so now we have a separate component
called profile data which takes in data
over here which can be used to actually
do something cool with profile data and
actually show the UI of the profile data
then once again we're going to come back
here to profile page and instead of
putting profile data like this we're
going to remove it and we're going to do
profile data import this from component
profile data and we're going to pass
data over here as profile data like so
and close this component now we did the
same exact thing as we did here with
this custom hook but we did it with a
custom component instead of having the
profile page be responsible for
implementing the logic of displaying
profile data data we can actually create
a separate component pass it the profile
data and have that work that way the
reason why you want to do things this
way whenever you're building react
applications is that now look at profile
page and how small it is right and we
actually have a lot of functionality
here we're fetching data directly so we
have a whole fetch system that is part
of this component that we just have with
one line of code then we actually have a
layout and styles we actually have if I
remind you over here we have a Navar we
have a footer directly inside of this
profile page over here and we actually
have the UI that displays the profile
data all with that with like 10 lines of
code nine lines of code actually this is
how you write clean code and react and
then profile data over here you can
imagine that this component would also
make use of other components for example
let's say that we had a part of it that
was the something like the Avatar
component right so we're going to do
Avatar and close it like this you can
imagine that this would hold the actual
profile picture of that specific profile
it might have some functionality to
allow the user to actually edit their
own profile might have a button that
when you tap on it it's going to pull up
a file input or something and then allow
you to edit the profile you would put
all of that in a separate component and
not inside of profile data over here you
would just pass the Avatar whatever you
need to pass it for example I don't know
we can do it like profile photo equals
and then profile data do profile photo
photo like this right so now this
component will have one responsibility
it's going to have the actual
functionality to display the Avatar and
any other functions related to it and we
pass it from here any properties that it
needs to do its functions if we then had
another component for example the
profile posts we can have something like
post list right which is a list of post
and we can actually do something like
posts and then we're going to do profile
data. post like so and pass the actual
post of the profile data to post list
post list would then take those post
would actually render them would
probably defer the rendering of each
specific individual post to another
component and doing it that way you
build really clean code in react and you
build applications that can scale really
really well and then as you do this
you're eventually going to get to a
point where you're rendering actual UI
and that's where you're going to use UI
components so things like buttons inputs
text cards and so on you're going to use
those to actually render what is being
shown on the screen but as you can see
those components usually don't go
directly inside of a page component
we're never going to see an actual UI
component over here I mean yes we have
an H1 tag but we could directly put this
inside of profile data as well it's
completely up to us but usually you're
not going to see individual UI inside of
this component you can see them either
in a feature component which is this
profile data which actually handles the
feature of displaying a profile data or
in other subcomponents like you you
could expect to see some UI components
inside of the Avatar component like an
actual thing that renders an actual
image with the user's profile photo that
will go inside of this Avatar component
if you do it this way and if you build a
habit of splitting things up into
smaller components or custom hooks every
single time you're never going to build
really big components that are super
messy and you're always going to write
clean code by default it's going to be a
great habit for you to learn and some of
you might say that this might be
Overkill like why are we creating a
whole custom hook just to fetch this one
user profile and the thing is it might
seem like Overkill but it's really not
because the moment that you need to use
this hook in a separate place you're
already going to have it created in a
separate file instead of taking the
exact code that you had here and
duplicating it inside of two components
that is worse to do and you're much more
likely to do that if you don't already
have a custom hook that is already
created and reusable for you to use so
really the way that I Write Clean code
and react is I always follow this
approach I split everything up into
different types of components so page
components which have the responsibility
once again to take everything AC across
the application and put them together
and make up what it means to be the
actual page that is St to render and
then we have feature components which go
inside of page components usually that
handle individual features and those
might use other feature components or
directly might use UI components to
actually render out some UI it's really
not that complicated actually what is
complicated to me as ironic as that
sound is to actually write complicated
code I don't get how people write
complicated code when if you follow a
simple pattern of actually delegating
creating custom components you're you're
just never going to end up writing any
complex code eror and most of your
components are going to look like this
so there you go these are some simple
tips and tricks that I use on a daily
basis to always make sure that I Write
Clean code in react I hope that you
enjoy this and I hope that this has now
made you a better react developer and
once again thank you to brilliant for
sponsoring this video If you enjoyed
this video and you want to see more
videos just like this one make sure to
leave this video a big thumbs up you can
also click here to subscribe or you can
click here to watch a different video of
mine that YouTube seems to think that
you're really going to enjoy and with
that being said my name is name has been
Dar cden this is Cen Solutions thank you
so much for watching and I will see you
in the next video chaa